
DAFUQ: Drinking Administrators Frequently Unasked Questions.

aka:

How to organise a piss-up for a conference when there's corporate sponsorship involved.

Author: Drinking Man ( manpubpint@gmail.com - http://manpubpint.com )
First Draft Edit:  A shade of purple


-----------

Some definitions, so we know the who / where / when:

* SOCIAL: a piss-up in a pub.
* PUB: building in which alcohol and food are available.
* ORGANISER: the "eager volunteer" who's arranging the social,
  taking the flack if it all goes wrong. Probably you, if you're
  reading this.
* EVENT: the conference itself
* EVENT SCHEDULE:  The date, start and end times of the EVENT.
* VENUE: building in which the EVENT takes place
* AUDIENCE: people who attend the EVENT and are likely to attend the SOCIAL.
* CROWD: the thirsty remains of the AUDIENCE who actually show up at the SOCIAL.
* PAYMENT MANAGER: person who pays for things. Usually someone in charge of the EVENT.
* KEY PUB PERSON - the person at the PUB who can agree dates and times, prices, and
pub offerings.  This may change between the time of initial pub booking and the day of the EVENT.

-------------

Phase 1: Pre event recon. The pre-drinking drinking.

The ORGANISER:

MUST: know the AUDIENCE demographic. The wrong type of PUB will just annoy everyone.

WRONG EXAMPLES of pub selection include:

        * karaoke bar for quiet types.
        * wine bar vs the real-ale crowd.

SHOULD: scope out suitable PUBS in the local area of day event. Have a pint at various
times, if possible on the day of week of the EVENT.

SHOULD: keep it simple. Avoid multiple pubs for socials across the day, or repeat
visits for lunch vs evening; it's more likely to confuse staff ("What do you
want when?") and drinkers ("Which pub is it? I forgot")

        * One crowd. One evening. One pub.

MUST: be present on the day of EVENT, or be able to hand over to a secondary party 
who can pick up the pieces when/if the organiser has a nervous breakdown.

MUST: establish from the PAYMENT MANAGER: budget for pub social (room hire if any,
wet/dry cost breakdown as required)

-------

Phase 2: Paperwork.

The ORGANISER:

MUST: prepare a spec document. Spec should fit on a single piece of paper, and
MUST contain:

        * TITLE OF EVENT. So if people walk in saying "Hi, we're here for blah blah
        conference/talk/social", the pub staff know what to expect.

        * DATE OF EVENT, and required start and end times of SOCIAL.

        If possible:  have the start of the SOCIAL exactly dovetailing into the end
        of main EVENT SCHEDULE. You often get people showing up for the social early,
        these are usually the slackers who just want to show up for a free piss-up.

        * Expected size of CROWD for the SOCIAL (give or take 20% if you already
        have rough numbers for the EVENT). Partly for venue licensing and fire
        regulations, but also for alcohol stock control so the bar doesn't run
        out on the day.

If food is required on the day and is an exception to the pub's normal offering on the day, the spec

MUST:  contain a guideline with examples of acceptable foods, so there's a variety
of veggie/meat stuff and hot/cold.

Food or not, the spec

        * MUST: contain the contact details of the ORGANISER - preferably 2 diverse
        forms of contact. A mobile phone number and some form of internet-based method
        (email / facebook) are good.

If the SOCIAL is offering  sponsored (free) drinks and/or food, the spec

        * MUST: give contact details of whom to request monies for a deposit and final
        payment. The PUB will need a name, physical address, multiple contact methods
        (phones and email)

        * MUST: give a budget for both wet (drinks) and dry (food) requirements. This
        gives the PUB a ballpark budget per head for guests.

Expect to have to lay down a deposit in advance. Paying a deposit also reinforces
the ORGANISER's position.

Finally, the spec

        * SHOULD: give a little background of the event if possible, so pub staff
        know a bit more about the SOCIAL's likely CROWD beforehand. (Is it a major
        milestone year for the event, are the guests mainly male vs female, viz:
        restocking of toilets,  will there need to be any specific disabled
        access requirements, etc)

-------------

Phase 3: Secondary pre-drinking drinking.

With spec in hand, the ORGANISER:

MUST: select a PUB based on

        * its ability to meet spec for the CROWD.
        * its stock of beers/wines/spirits.
        * its availability on the right day,
        * its location. Easily walkable from EVENT venue.

If possible, the ORGANISER:

SHOULD: be a regular at the PUB (or at least have easy access in the time
approaching the EVENT)

If possible, the PUB:

SHOULD: have a separate function room - mainly so you don't have 100 people
show up and piss off the locals who want to watch the match on the big screen
in the main bar.

If you're going to do an urban pub takeover and have exclusive use of the pub,
it will probably cost extra money. Especially on a weekend. A function room is
a good compromise.

Our ORGANISER:

MUST: print 2 hardcopies of the spec. One should stay with the PUB in their
main bookings diary, usually kept behind the bar somewhere. The second should
stay with the ORGANISER for easy reference.

A third electronic copy should be emailed to the PAYMENT MANAGER.

Additionally, the ORGANISER:

MUST: identify a KEY PUB PERSON who will have authority to confirm that PUB can
offer the required spec at agreed price, and confirm how payment should be made,
and to whom.

At which point, the ORGANISER:

MUST: book the PUB. As soon as the EVENT date and venue are formalised, the PUB
for the SOCIAL should be organised and booked. Pub weekends get busy during
the football and/or wedding season in the spring and summer, and the Christmas
run-up always means office parties. Book as early as you can.

-------------

Phase 4. Post-booking / pre-event drinks. You may notice a theme here.

The ORGANISER:

MUST: inform the EVENT organisers of the choice of PUB, giving

        * Pub name
        * Full Pub address (this is especially important if there are 2 pubs with very
        similar names in the same area)
        * Contact details of KEY PUB  PERSON to send any required deposit to.

and the ORGANISER:

SHOULD: ensure any deposit gets paid as soon as possible. This makes it harder
for the  pub to "accidentally" double-book your SOCIAL date when they've
had a load of cash handed to them.

SHOULD: get a receipt for deposit, and send it back to the PAYMENT MANAGER.

This completes the first half of the paperwork dance.

If you have a long timeframe between the date of the initial PUB booking and
the date of the EVENT itself, the ORGANISER:

SHOULD: swing by the PUB every couple of weeks to stay in the minds of the venue
staff, as a pub usually rotates people around daytime and evening shifts.
Bar staff vary, maximise your chance of being recognised.

MUST: establish who the KEY PUB PERSON will be on the day of the EVENT, and if
possible, meet them to put a face to a name.

If this is the ORGANISER's first time with a particular PUB's management,
it's a chance to build up a relationship with the staff,  have a pint and look
for any possible gotchas in advance. This is especially useful for independent
pubs.

The ORGANISER:

MUST: chase the PAYMENT MANAGER to get any required deposit to the KEY PUB
PERSON, and check said person receives such payments, and establish how any
balance should be paid on the day of the SOCIAL.

MUST: relay any critical changes of PUB availability back to the PAYMENT
MANAGER. If the pub becomes unavailable on the required day, a new pub must
be found quickly, as pubs get booked up in advance.

MUST: liaise with PAYMENT MANAGER, and advise the KEY PUB PERSON of any changes
in CROWD numbers / budget as soon as possible.

SHOULD: liaise with KEY PUB PERSON re any EVENT promotional items (a poster
on the wall on the night, anything to be put on tables, any wifi access for
guests, etc). Ask, don't assume. Especially before sticking things to walls.

Finally, the PAYMENT MANAGER

SHOULD: organise collection of monies from sponsors, the SOCIAL ORGANISER
will be busy enough on the day running around between VENUE and PUB and sticking
things to walls.

--------------

Phase 5: On the day. Actual drinking.

The ORGANISER:

MUST: be generally visible on the day of EVENT, or have handed over to someone
to act in organiser capacity, and updated PAYMENT MANAGER and KEY PUB PERSON
of all new details.

SHOULD: be around the front desk at registration, to see and be seen by the
AUDIENCE, a percentage of whom will make up the CROWD later on.

MUST: know what the CROWD is going to look like..

MUST: check in with the PUB at the lunch break in case the staff are running
late with anything. This gives you the afternoon to get hold of the KEY PUB
PERSON and do any last-minute fixes.

MUST: ensure the speaker wrapping up the EVENT knows to announce the SOCIAL
in the closing speech - this is  especially important in the case of a
last-minute PUB change.

Most critically, the ORGANISER:

MUST: be at the PUB before the SCHEDULE has finished.

Once there, they:

SHOULD: prepare the PUB with any required signage - as a minimum, have the
EVENT's logo on the door, and an arrow to the function room if booked.

If a bartab is being run behind the bar for sponsored drinks, the ORGANISER:

MUST: establish a payment method to get the bartab open - usually a company
card with suitable available limit as guarantee.

MUST: establish any tab rules (password, or items to be shown, to get free
drinks, or any limits on drink types)

SHOULD: be near the bar keeping an eye on the tab, in case a bunch of random
freeloaders try to blag rounds of drinks. See "ORGANISER should be visible
at the EVENT and know the CROWD"

MUST: liaise with a contact still at EVENT in case the VENUE throws everyone
out early. It happens. Having a point still at VENUE gives the PUB staff
advanced warning of a rush at the bar, especially if food is still being
laid out. A quick text of "we're on the move" from your contact will suffice.

MUST: establish final payment contacts - introduce the PAYMENT MANAGER to the 
KEY PUB PERSON, so they can sort out the final bill between them. This allows
the ORGANISER's card behind the bar to be swapped for the PAYMENT MANAGER's
one. Don't be stuck with the bill at the end of the night.

If a bartab is being run, keep an eye on the running total every half an hour
or so, agreeing to raise it if needed, or closing it when the agreed wet
budget has been hit, and doing a quick shout-out to the CROWD accordingly.

SHOULD: be able to give basic local information for transport and cashpoints.
Maybe have last train/tube/bus details and a local map, or a reliable cab
number. To be honest, if you're old enough to drink, you should be able to get
yourself home, but if people are travelling from afar, they appreciate this.

SHOULD: have a pint and relax once the CROWD is in the PUB and the first
round has been downed.  90% of the work has been done, now just let the people
do their thing. Be social, but don't get too pissed, you're still working
(or at least, supposed to be functional).

------------

Phase 6: Aftermath / Hangover / Hair Of The Dog.

FINALLY:

If the PAYMENT MANAGER doesn't get a final invoice on the night, expect to do
one final visit in the following days to procure one. (You may have to chase
KEY PUB PERSON for this, but it's important for everyone's sanity and accountants).

As part of this, the ORGANISER:

SHOULD: Have a pint. You've survived it.